# Ideas during first time setup

## Current setup

Hypervisor : VMware® Workstation 12 Pro 12.0.0 build-2985596
Host : Windows 10, 64-bit  (Build 15063) 10.0.15063

### Lab

2 Win Servers 2016 Datacenter edition
Both version `10.0.14393`

1 AD + WSUS server
2 WSUS client

Update policy configured via GPO, linked to entire domain.


## Installation & Setup

### Day 1
At first I've tried to use Server Core to host AD and WSUS, but I got totally stuck
while setting up AD. For whatever reason, the second server was completely unable to reach the AD server using hostname, pings were working.
No idea what went wrong , but playing with Server Core was not the point of this "Lab" so VM got deleted and I've created new one with Server Desktop Experience installed on it. There I got no more problems with AD.

Shits happens , right ? :)

WSUS is just another role of OS so installation is as simple as possible. After instalaltion is done, you're not prompted to reboot the server.
But I've had tons of issues trying execute initial synchronization.

- reboot solved it :)
- The initial sync takes a while - ~20 minutes in my case

Forcefull refresh of GPO seems to be not enough for the Windows Update to work properly after configuration change - until reboot none of the servers was visible in the WSUS console.

After reboot both servers are visible `Unassigned Computers` container.

- both servers are marked with yellow exclamation mark and description `This computer has not reported status yet`

After configuration of Products and Clasifications it took around 5 minutes for WSUS to start downloading packages from Microsoft.

- product : Win Server 2016
- classifications : Critical updates, definition updates , feature packs, security updates , service packs , update rollups , updates , upgrades

- WSUS downloaded 14GB's of data - you're gonna need solid storage...


Servers are still not correctly reporting to WSUS.

Tried forcing refresh of report by using `wuauclt /reportnow` and also `/detectnow` but nothing has helped , and there are no log messages anywhere.

Many hours spent on reseting everything and trying to debug the process , nothing that would suggest what's the problem found

- Tons of blogs and forums checked , everything suggested tried , so far no luck.
- Found some suggestions to update my WSUS server from the internet as usual with the latest cumulative package.
  - update from Microsoft works perfectly fine - installing the latest cumulative package
  - after installation is done , switching configuration back to WSUS source of updates.
  - Still no luck

After dozens of desperate tries and fails I've tried to recreate GPO object that enforces Windows Update settings , GPO contains exactly the same settings as before , just created again.

- this is nuts , but it helped for some reason
  - I'm sure the policy was applied properly even before, all my required settings     were in place as expected

There was no difference at first, I've decided to delete computers from WSUS console and rebooted both VM's .

After reboot, AD Server (hosting WSUS as well) immediatelly appeared in the WSUS console and correctly reports it's status. Second servers is still nowhere .

Another reboot of client server.

- Client server is back in WSUS console

Executing on client server : `wuauclt /reportnow /detectnow` .

Took a minute or so , but client appeared in WSUS console as well.

Client is finally reporting to WSUS server properly.

Time to approve one update and see what happens :)

So one update, even though I'm sure it's not yet installed on client , got approved and was not detected by os.

I approved all updates that are not superseeded by others, finally client detects new updates to be installed.

So far it's stuck at 0% , trying to download updates, at least that what it says, but I've monitored network activity, and there is pretty much none.

- no errors in eventlog

Enough for today.

### Day 2

Waited couple of hours, no progress at all. Time to google this shit out :).

Tried to stop `Windows Update` service and delete content of `C:\Windows\SoftwareDistribution` . Let's see what happens .

### Day 3

Nothing has helped.

Let's try to install new 2k8 server and setup WSUS server there.

- New server is in place , WSUS role installed, initial sync running.
- Sync was much faster than with 2k16 server , took just around 3-4 minutes
- GPO configured to point to new WSUS server
- on WSUS server `wuauclt /reportnow /detectnow` executed
  - server immediately appeared in console
  - reporting status properly
- AD and Client server (2k16) not yet in WSUS console
  - rebooting both
  - disk subsystem is getting it's ass kicked pretty hard :)
- Just to be sure rebooting WSUS server as well
- AD booted up , executed the `/detectnow`
  - server appeared in WSUS console, waiting for client server
- Client server is back
  - parameters `/reportnow /detectnow/ seems to do the trick - Server is visible in console
  - waiting for 2k16 servers to report
- AD just reported sucessfully
- Client server still not providing report
- Client server deleted , fresh install is running : Same OS version as before
- Client installed , appeared in WSUS console , waiting for report
- WSUS server detected approve updates :)
  - 2k8 server update installed without problems
- 2k16 Client still not sending report :(


### Day 4

- Decided to try everything again, build it from scratch.
- Prepared a new W2016 template, with installed ***latest updates***
- Current setup : 
  - W2k16 Datacenter Edition
  - 1 AD server
  - 1 WSUS server
  - 1 W2k16 server client
  - 1 w2k8 server client

All servers already contain latest updates, so I'm not planning to test the updating OS immediatelly - will have to wait for next release of updates.

- After initial setup , all servers appeared in WSUS console without problems and also reporting status correctly.
  - seems that in previous setup there was some issue, which got fixed by one of the installed updates in current setup.

Let's wait for another wave of patches.


### Day 5
- New updates were released for Server 2016, let's try them.
- WSUS server detected new updates and downloading them - so far so good , right ? :)
- Updates are downloaded, and approved for install.
- Forced 2016 Client to search for updates
  - server detected new updates , trying to download them.
  - I'm monitoring network activity, I can tell that server is actually downloading something from WSUS.
- Server downloaded updates, they are ready for installation - not installed automatically due to my Group Policy settings.
- Installing updates
- All new updates installed with sucess .

## Conclusion
WSUS is pretty simple until it stop's working , then it's hell :D